we begin with some breaking news uh
three European countries have said they
will recognize Palestinian statehood
Spanish prime minister Pedro Sanchez
made the expected announcement earlier
in his country's Parliament Norwegian
prime minister yonis gura said the
official recognition of Palestine by
Norway and others will take effect on
May 28th Ireland's prime minister Simon
Harris called it a historic day in
response is is says it's now recalling
its ambassadors in Norway and Ireland
will'll have a listen to what the Irish
leader
said today Ireland Norway and Spain are
announcing that we recognize the state
of Palestine each of us will now
undertake whatever National steps are
necessary to give effect to that
decision in the leadup to today's
announcement I've spoken with a number
of other leaders ERS and counterparts
and I'm confident that further countries
will join us in taking this important
step in the coming
weeks this is an historic and important
day for Ireland and for
Palestine well for more on this we're
joined from Brussels by our
correspondent Jack perck Jack three EU
countries recognizing Palestinian
statehood what does this
mean well at the moment this is broadly
symbolic and political gesture by these
three countries but it is extremely
significant what we heard from the
Spanish prime minister Pedro Sanchez
when he made the announcement he said
that the recognition of a it's a it's a
recognition of the Palestinian people to
their right to
self-determination the Irish Prime
Minister Simon Harris we just heard from
he said that permanent peace can only be
secured on the basis of a free will of a
free people essentially what they're
trying to do is show that their
countries are committed to the two-state
solution where there is a Palestinian
state where the St Palestinian people
have
self-determination it's a big move
though and as we've heard the Israelis
have already recalled their ambassadors
from Oslo and from Dublin as well um and
so this is quite a major step forward we
were expecting some other EU countries
could potentially have made it but we
now know that that it was Ireland Spain
and Norway which is not an EU country
that have made this announce
today well what about the other EU
countries there are 27 in all could we
see other countries coming on board with
that
soon yeah it was expected perhaps that
Belgium would also agree to do this and
to recognize Palestinian statehood now
there's questions about different
procedures and legislative motions that
need to happen in each individual
country the EU has quite a complex and
difficult situation when it comes to the
the recognition of Palestine or a
Palestinian State the EU has for a long
time campaigned for a two-state solution
where there is a Palestinian state with
self-determination for the Palestinian
people but as a whole the EU doesn't
recognize a state of Palestine and
that's very difficult for them to do the
only country that has done what has been
done today in the European Union as an
EU member country was Sweden back in
2014 countries like Malta Cyprus
Bulgaria Hungary Hungary and Poland they
had Rec recognized the state of
Palestine before they entered the EU so
this is a big step forward though and I
think the the signal of how big of a
step forward it is is this quite strong
reaction from the Israelis the Israeli
foreign Ministry saying that this move
could fuel extremism and instability in
the
region what is it Jack that uh prevents
countries from recognizing Palestinian
statehood how complex is
that it is quite complex but mainly for
countries that are staunch supporters of
Israel countries like Germany for
instance uh they would be nervous about
the reaction that we are seeing to this
especially in the current climate after
the October the 7th terrorist attack and
the subsequent um Israeli bombardment in
Gaza the question is what exactly needs
to shift diplomatically and in a foreign
foreign policy Sphere for the European
Union to get on the same uh page on this
it's quite significant well as I said
they're trying to still uphold the idea
of a two-state solution we know that
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu says that that's not possible
so the EU wants that to continue to be
its policy but how feasible is that but
countries like we've seen today like
Ireland and Spain making this move shows
that that is their staunch belief uh and
that they will continue to press for
that two-state solution Jack thank you
very very much our correspondent Jack
perck there in Brussels